[MUSIC]
>> Douglas Crockford: Everything in
JavaScript is an object, so numbers,
booleans, strings, arrays, dates,
regular expressions and functions,
they're all objects.
So, let's look at numbers, numbers
are objects, it's a much a simpler number
system than you have in Java in that
we don't have ints and integers,
you don't have either of those,
you just have numbers.
We make numbers with number literals.
All these number literals
refer to the same object.
>> Douglas Crockford: There's only one
number type in JavaScript which is
actually a very good thing and there are
no integer types which is something you
have to get used to but
it's actually a good thing too.
The problem is that the one number
type we have is the wrong one.
It's based on 64-bit binary floating
point from the IEEE-754 standard
which is strangely called double
in Java and other languages.
Anybody care to know
why it's called double?
Why they picked such a silly name?
It's something that comes from Fortran.
Fortran had integer and real and
later they added double precision,
which was two reals put together in
order to give you more precision.
And C took Fortran's double precision and
shortened it to double.
And everyone else has been
using double ever since then.
So we don't have ints and I'm glad
we don't have ints cuz I hate ints.
Ints have some really strange properties.
For example, we can have two ints
which are both greater than zero.
We can add them together and
we can get results that are smaller
than the original numbers, which is
insane and inexcusable, and how can
you have any confidence in the correctness
and the perfection of your system
if it's built on a number type which
can do such insanely ridiculous things?
So JavaScript does not have this defect
in it which I think is brilliant.
So one problem with computer
arithmetic in general
is that the Associative Law will not hold,
and that's because
computer numbers are necessarily
finite and real numbers aren't.
So in many cases we're only
dealing with approximations.
And when the values are approximate,
then associativity doesn't hold.
Now if you just confine
to the integer space,
JavaScript integers go up to around
9 quadrillion, which is pretty big.
9 quadrillion is bigger than
the national debt, so it's big, right?
That's big.
So as long as your integers are smaller
than 9 quadrillion they work out exactly.
When the integers get above 9 quadrillion
they don't do the crazy wrap around
thing that ints do, they just get fuzzy.
So if I take a number above 9
quadrillion and add 1 to it, it's like I
added 0 to it, which is not good but
it's much less bad than what ints do.
And because computer
arithmetic can be approximate,
then there are identities that we're
used to thinking about which don't hold.
So you need to be aware of that and
cautious.
So the most reported bug for JavaScript
is that 0.10 + 0.20 is not equal to 0.30.
And that's because we're trying
to represent decimal fractions
in binary floating point.
And binary floating point
cannot accurately represent
most of the decimal fractions.
It can only approximate them, but
it approximates them with infinite
repeating bit patterns, but we're not
allowed to have infinitely long numbers.
And so they truncate, and so
every number is gonna be slightly wrong.
Which is only a problem if you're living
on a planet that uses the decimal system.
But on such a planet,
you're counting people's money using this.
When you're adding people's money,
they have a reasonable expectation
you're gonna get the right sum.
And we're not guaranteed to get the right
sum with binary floating point,
which is a huge problem.
>> Douglas Crockford: Numbers are objects,
and so numbers have methods.
You don't have to box them in
order to get object behavior.
Every number is already an object.
Every number inherits
from number.prototype.
So if we wanted to add
new methods to numbers,
we can do that by adding
them to number.prototype.
This is not something that applications
should ever do, but it is a useful
thing for libraries to do, and in fact
this is how we evolve the language.
So we can add new methods to new
versions of the standard and
libraries can back fill old browsers,
and old implementations
with the new stuff as long as new methods
can be implemented in JavaScript.
Numbers are first class objects which
means that a number can be stored in
a variable, can be passed as a parameter,
can be returned from a function and
it can be stored in an object.
And because numbers are themselves
objects they can have methods.
JavaScript has made the same mistake
that Java made in having a separate math
object or math container for
keeping the higher
elementary functions.
This was done in Java anticipating that
in the future there might be very low
memory configurations and they'd wanna
be able to remove the math functions.
That didn't happen because Moore's Law
kept cranking on memory capacity so
that turned out not to
have been a good strategy.
But it wouldn't have worked anyway because
you'd be throwing away essential things
like floor.
There's no good way to
get the integer part of
a number if you get rid of the floor
function so it couldn't have worked.
There are also some constants
stored in the math object as well.
So, one of the worst, or
one of the things that we get from
the IEEE format is something called NaN,
which stands for Not a Number.
It's the result of confusing or
erroneous operations.
For example, if you're trying to
divide zero by zero the result is NaN.
NaN is toxic, which means that any
arithmetic operation with NaN as an input
will have NaN as an output.
And despite the fact that NaN stands for
Not a Number, it is a number.
If you ask JavaScript,
what is the type of NaN?
It says number and it's right.
>> Douglas Crockford: The thing I hate
about NaN is that NaN is not equal to
anything including NaN, so
NaN equal NaN is false.
Which bugs the hell out of me and
even worse than that is that
NaN not equal NaN is true.
Which I hate even more.
So if you want to find out if something
is NaN, there is a global isNaN function.
And you can pass NaN to it and
it will return true, which is good.
Unfortunately, isNaN
also does type coercion.
So if you pass it a string
like hello world,
it'll try to convert
the string into a number.
The number that hello world
turns into is NaN, so
hello world is NaN, which is not true.
>> Douglas Crockford: So ever since
Fortran, we've been writing statements
that look like this, x = x + 1,
which is mathematical nonsense.
So ALGOL got this right.
ALGOL came up with an assignment operator
so this didn't look so ridiculous, and
BCPL did the same thing as
ALGOL which got it right.
Unfortunately Thompson liked this better,
and so we reverted back to it and
we have not evolved away from this since.
So we're stuck with this and
it looks crazy, right?
Because it looks like an equation but
there's no value of x
which equals x + 1 right.
Except it turns out if you're
using binary floating point,
there's a value called infinity.
And, if you add one to infinity, you get
infinity so this actually is an equation.
There is a value of X for
which this is true.
And not just that, there's another
value called Number.MAX_VALUE
which is one followed by 308 digits,
that's a really big number.
And if you add one to the biggest number
that JavaScript knows you would think that
would be infinity but it isn't it,
it'll be MAX_VALUE, so it holds.
In fact that is true for
every number above 9 quadrillion.
So there's a lot of values for
which this holds.
>> Douglas Crockford: But not NaN.
Even though NaN plus one is NaN,
NaN is not equal to NaN.
So I hate that and NaN,
I hate that even more.